StateT Documentation (#4126)
typelevel/cats: docs/src/main/mdoc/datatypes/statet.md

      case GameState(_, _, attemptNum) if attemptNum == (maxAttempts - 1) =>
        Left(Loose)
      case GameState(target, guessedChars, attemptNum) =>
        Right(
          GameState(
            target = target,
            guessedChars = guessedChars ++ guess,
            attemptNum = attemptNum + 1
          )
        )
    }

}
```

In the code above you can see some useful functions, such the one that returns the encrypted target word. A brief example here:

```scala mdoc
val gameState1 = GameState("cats")
println(GameState.showWordHidden(gameState1))
val gameState2 = GameState.attemptGuess(gameState1, "bats")
println(GameState.showWordHidden(gameState2.getOrElse(???)))
```

Let's focus on the state machine game steps.

```scala mdoc:silent
object StateMachine {

  def step1(): Eval[GameState] = for {
    _ <- Eval.later(println("Insert the target word: "))
    word <- Eval.later(readLine())
  } yield GameState(word)

  def step2(): StateT[Eval, GameState, Unit] = for {
    state <- StateT.get[Eval, GameState]
    _ <- StateT.liftF(Eval.later(println(GameState.showWordHidden(state))))
  } yield ()

  def step3(): StateT[Eval, GameState, String] = for {

>     _ <- StateT.liftF(Eval.later(println("Insert the guess word: ")))

Reviewer: I also am -1 on using Eval as a poor man's IO monad.

We should not use a pattern we don't recommend in our documentation.

I would instead suggest using `StateT[Either[String, *], GameState, Unit]` in order to model steps that can somehow fail or something along those lines.

Reviewer 2: `Either` seems good. Easier to grok than `Writer`.

---
layout: docs
title:  "StateT"
section: "data"
source: "core/src/main/scala/cats/data/package.scala"
scaladoc: "#cats.data.StateT"
---
# StateT

`StateT[F[_], S, A]` is a data type used to define state machine

> effectful computations that can be easily composed into a larger one.

Reviewer 2: Can we directly reference the `State` docs here? e.g.
> `StateT` is a monad transformer for `State` that enables you to combine the state machine effects of `State` with the effects of another monad `F[_]`

In fact, it's notable that `State[A] = StateT[Eval, A]` 😁 

http://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html

Author: In addition to the comment (https://github.com/typelevel/cats/pull/4126/files#r810610617), if you like I can add to this first phrase a reference to `State` like:

```suggestion
`StateT[F[_], S, A]` is a data type that extends the `State` one further: it is used to define state machine computations as well, but it also allows to perform effects at each step.
`StateT` is also a `Monad`, therefore we can easily compose its values into a larger one.
```

Author: I see, let's iterate once more then :) 
```suggestion
StateT[F[_], S, A]` is a data type that extends the `State` one further: it is used to define state machine computations as well, but it also allows to perform computations returning a value enclosed in `F` at each step. Such capability is often called `lifting`.
In addition, `StateT` values share the same composition properties as `F` values: if `F` is a `Functor` then `StateT[F,A,B]` will also be a `Functor`. However, beware that different `StateT` operations might required different typeclass instances, refer to the [API](https://typelevel.org/cats/api/cats/data/package$$StateT$.html) for the details.
```

Reviewer 2: hmm 🤔 how about

> `StateT[F[_], S, A]` is a data type that generalizes `State` with the ability to compose with effects in `F[_]`. Because `StateT` is defined in terms of `F`, it is a monad only if `F` is a monad. Additionally, `StateT` may acquire new capabilities via `F`: for example, if `F` is capable of error handling via `MonadThrow[F]`, then Cats derives an instance of `MonadThrow[StateT[F, S, *]]`.

The type parameters are:
- `F[_]` represents the effect in which the computation is performed.
- `S` represents the underlying state, shared between each step of the
  state machine.
- `A` represents the return value.

It can be seen as a way to add the capability to manipulate a shared

> state, to an existing computation in the context of `F`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
state to an existing computation in the context of `F`.
```

This definition could be confusing, but it will become clear after
learning the `State` monad and by the example below.

## StateT and State Relationship

`StateT` is a monad transformer for
[State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html), in
particular [State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html) is
defined as a `StateT` with
[Eval](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/eval.html) as the effect
`F`.  Therefore, `StateT` exposes the same methods of
[State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html), such as:
`modify`, `get` and `set`.  Plus additional methods, that handles

> effectful computations, eg: `modifyF`, `setF` and `liftF`.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see you already have this here :) 👍 IMO we should have this at the beginning. I think it's difficult to understand `StateT` without understanding `State`.

Author: I agree about the fact that it's hard to understand `StateT` without knowing `State`. My idea was to give an initial brief general definition of the `StateT` datatype and then specify the relationship with `State`. At the end of the day, it's just <20 lines below 😅 

I can definitely add the type synonym for `State` in here for clarity.

Reviewer 2: I agree, a brief general definition is always very good :) "state machine effectful computations" is something that's really hard to know what that means though, IMO. Even "state machiner" and "effect" by themselves are kind of complex!

Author: True, the problem is that some stuff is not at ground level by definition. 
What we can do is to put reference links where the reader can go and grasp the "prerequisite concepts", eg a Wikipedia link to [state machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine) or a youtube link to what an effect system is (I just attended an amazing one as keynote in ScalaLove 2022 <3 )

## Example: Table Reservation System

In this example, we are going to model a *Table Reservation System*. To
do so, we need to keep track of the tables and the current
reservations for each of them. The end-user can then try to insert a
booking for a specific table and time. If such a table is available,
then the booking is placed and the state is updated, otherwise, an
error is returned.

To simplify the logic, for each reservation we will just consider a
single `LocalTime` starting at the beginning of the hour.

Let's start with defining the type synonyms for the state of the
program and the effect type:

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.data.{StateT, NonEmptyList}
import cats.implicits._
import java.time.LocalTime

type TRSState = Map[(Int, LocalTime), String]

> type EffectType[A] = Either[Throwable, A]

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about these type aliases. Can we use a `case class` for `TRSState` instead? Maybe call it `Reservations`?

For `EffectType`, I wonder if we use `Either[Throwable, *]` directly in the code. Less sure about this one.

Author: I was thinking the same when coding it 😄 
What I can do is to create a `Reservation` case class this way:
```
case class ReservationId(tableNumber: Int, hour: LocalTime)
case class Reservation(id: ReservationId, name: String)
```
and then create a `Reservations` class extending `Map[ReservationId, Reservation]` that can be constructed from `NonEmptyList[Reservation]`. I would like to keep the `Map` capabilities due to the fact that the comparison needs to happen on the key only in order to identify clashes later on, wdyt?

Regarding the `EffectType` to `Either[Throwable, *]`. It can definitely be done, but since it's used multiple times below, I find it more concise to have a type synonym. It's still a matter of taste, if you insist one more time I'll do the change 😛

Reviewer 2: Btw I had another idea for this one, maybe `type ThrowableOr[A] = Either[Throwable, A]`. Actually I wonder why we don't have this alias in cats.

Reviewer 2: > create a `Reservations` class extending `Map[ReservationId, Reservation]`

Hmm, I think this would be rather unusual, like using `Eval` to suspend side-effects. Using a `case class` (and defining extra methods on it) is more idiomatic than extending a `Map` (especially the Scala collections APIs are very complicated, even the collections in cats do not extend them).

I like your case classes 👍

Author: Fair, I'll apply such changes ;)

```

`TRSState` stands for *Table Reservation System State* and it will
organize the reservations in a `Map` with:
- `(Int, LocalTime)` as key, representing the table number and hour
respectively.
- `String` as value, representing the reservation name.

> As effect type, we will just use an `Either[Throwable, A]` because each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the underlying effect, we will use an `Either[Throwable, A]` because each
```

booking insertion can fail.

Now, we need to implement/define:
- An initial state, that will be just an empty `Map`.
- A custom `Throwable` to be used in case of an error.
- The logic for the booking insertion. We can take advantage of the
method `modifyF`.

In addition, we can implement a simple function that will evaluate a
`NonEmptyList` of reservations, inserting them one by one.

```scala mdoc:silent
object TableReservationSystem {

>   final case class AlreadyReservedTable(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  final case class TableAlreadyReservedException(
```

      tableNumber: Int,
      time: LocalTime,
      reservation: String

>   ) extends Throwable(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ) extends RuntimeException(
```

        s"$reservation cannot be added because table number $tableNumber is already reserved for the $time"
      )

  val emptyReservationSystem: TRSState = Map.empty

  def insertBooking(
      tableNumber: Int,
      time: LocalTime,
      name: String
  ): StateT[EffectType, TRSState, Unit] =
    StateT.modifyF[EffectType, TRSState]((currentReservations: TRSState) =>
      currentReservations
        .get((tableNumber, time))
        .fold[EffectType[TRSState]](Right(currentReservations + ((tableNumber, time) -> name)))(_ =>
          Left(AlreadyReservedTable(tableNumber, time, name))
        )
    )

  def evalBookings(

>       bookings: NonEmptyList[(Int, LocalTime, String)]

Reviewer 2: Maybe nice to have a `ReservationRequest` case class for `(Int, LocalTime, String)`

Author: related to this comment above https://github.com/typelevel/cats/pull/4126/files#r810615136

  ): EffectType[TRSState] =
    bookings
      .map { case (tn, t, n) =>
        TableReservationSystem.insertBooking(tn, t, n)
      }

>       .reduceLeft(_ *> _)

Reviewer 2: I worry if this line is confusing because of all the fancy syntax.

Author: This is actually the line for composing the `StateT`s to a single one. I'm open to suggestions to make it less cryptic 🙌

Reviewer 2: Sure :) maybe something like this.
```scala
.reduceLeft((acc, bookNext) => acc.productL(bookNext))
```

      .runS(TableReservationSystem.emptyReservationSystem)
}
```

That's it, we can finally test the code above providing a simple
example input and print out the result.

```scala mdoc
val bookings = NonEmptyList.of(
  (1, LocalTime.parse("10:00:00"), "Cristiano Ronaldo"),
  (2, LocalTime.parse("10:00:00"), "Lebron James"),
  (1, LocalTime.parse("12:00:00"), "Tiger Woods"),
  (2, LocalTime.parse("12:00:00"), "Roger Federer"),
  (3, LocalTime.parse("13:00:00"), "Elizabeth Alexandra Mary"),
  (1, LocalTime.parse("16:00:00"), "Chuck Norris"),
  (2, LocalTime.parse("16:00:00"), "Kobe Bryant"),
  (2, LocalTime.parse("18:00:00"), "Steven Seagal")
)

> println(TableReservationSystem.evalBookings(bookings))

Reviewer 2: We don't need `println` in mdoc :) if you write `TableReservationSystem.evalBookings(bookings)` it will automatically put it in the output

    target = target,
    guessedChars = Set.empty[Char],
    attemptNum = 0
  )

  def showWordHidden(state: GameState): String =
    state.target.map(c => if (state.guessedChars.contains(c)) c else '*')

  def attemptGuess(
      state: GameState,
      guess: String
  ): Either[GameOver, GameState] =
    state match {
      case GameState(t, _, _) if t == guess => Left(Win)
      case GameState(_, _, attemptNum) if attemptNum == (maxAttempts - 1) =>
        Left(Loose)
      case GameState(target, guessedChars, attemptNum) =>
        Right(
          GameState(
            target = target,
            guessedChars = guessedChars ++ guess,
            attemptNum = attemptNum + 1
          )
        )
    }
}
```

In the code above you can see some useful functions, such as the one
that returns the encrypted target word.

In the following snippet you can see the above code in action:

```scala mdoc
val gameState1 = GameState("cats")
println(GameState.showWordHidden(gameState1))
val gameState2 = GameState.attemptGuess(gameState1, "bats")
println(GameState.showWordHidden(gameState2.getOrElse(???)))
```

Unfortunately, the rest of the example can't be shown here due to the

> required `cats-effect` dependency. We recommend to check out the rest

Reviewer 2: Would you consider contributing this example to the Cats Effect docs? :) I think it would be cool!

Author: I agree. I looked quickly at the `cats-effects` doc site, but it's not structured in the same way as this one. I struggle to identify where we can put general `IO` examples like the hangman one. 

What I would like more is to extend the `example` folder in the repo(or have a separate repo) with more use cases like this one, so newcomers can go, grab the code or just check it out easily. This also applies to `cats` repo actually, but this is more of a _Megathread_ 😅

Reviewer 2: That's true, I guess we'd have to add an "examples" section to the cats-effect docs. Hum.

Yes, this is totally a mega-thread issue :) Probably we need a unified Typelevel docs site + examples repo, that can show examples using multiple projects together, like cats and cats-effect. There are already a few projects for this purpose, like https://github.com/djspiewak/kitteh-redis.

I know the typelevel.org website is currently being redesigned and I had some ideas in https://github.com/typelevel/governance/discussions/28 that maybe we can raise some funding for improving documentation as well. Feel free to comment there or raise an issue about this topic since you seem passionate about it :)

Author: I'll definitely have a look there 😉 

Passionate...I'm just a lazy coder who likes to copy-paste code 😝 That's why I like the `examples` repo idea

method `modifyF` later on to apply it to the system state.

In addition, we can implement a simple function that will evaluate a
`NonEmptyList` of reservations, inserting them one by one.

```scala mdoc:silent
object TableReservationSystem {

  final case class ReservationId(tableNumber: Int, hour: LocalTime)
  final case class Reservation(id: ReservationId, name: String)
  final case class Reservations(reservations: List[Reservation]) {
    def insert(reservation: Reservation): ThrowableOr[Reservations] =
      if (reservations.exists(r => r.id == reservation.id))
        Left(TableAlreadyReserved(reservation))
      else Right(Reservations(reservations :+ reservation))
  }

  final case class TableAlreadyReserved(
      reservation: Reservation
  ) extends RuntimeException(
        s"${reservation.name} cannot be added because table number ${reservation.id.tableNumber} is already reserved for the ${reservation.id.hour}"
      )

  val emptyReservationSystem: Reservations = Reservations(List.empty)

  def insertBooking(
      reservation: Reservation
  ): StateT[ThrowableOr, Reservations, Unit] =
    StateT.modifyF[ThrowableOr, Reservations](_.insert(reservation))

>   def evalBookings(

Reviewer 2: `eval` is confusing with `Eval`. Maybe `processBookings`?

## StateT and State Relationship

`StateT` is a monad transformer for
[State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html), in
particular [State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html) is
defined as a `StateT` with
[Eval](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/eval.html) as the effect
`F`.

```scala mdoc:silent
import cats.data.StateT
import cats.Eval

type State[S, A] = StateT[Eval, S, A]
```

Therefore, `StateT` exposes the same methods of
[State](https://typelevel.org/cats/datatypes/state.html), such as:
`modify`, `get` and `set`.  Plus additional methods, that handles
effectful computations, eg: `modifyF`, `setF` and `liftF`.

## Example: Table Reservation System

In this example, we are going to model a *Table Reservation System*. To
do so, we need to keep track of the tables and the current
reservations for each of them. The end-user can then try to insert a
booking for a specific table and time. If such a table is available,
then the booking is placed and the state is updated, otherwise, an
error is returned.

To simplify the logic, for each reservation we will just consider a
single `LocalTime` starting at the beginning of the hour.

> Let's start with defining the type synonym for the effect type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start with defining the type alias for the effect type:
```

```scala mdoc:silent:reset
import cats.data.{StateT, NonEmptyList}

> import cats.implicits._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import cats.syntax.all._
```

`cats.implicits._` is deprecated

import java.time.LocalTime

type ThrowableOr[A] = Either[Throwable, A]
```

> We will use an `Either[Throwable, A]` because each
> booking insertion can fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use an `Either[Throwable, A]` to model either success `Right(a)` or failure `Left(ex)`.
```

Now, we need to implement/define:
- The type representing the reservation.
- The type representing the state of the Table Reservation System. It
  will wrap around a collection of Reservations.

> - An initial state, that will be just an empty state type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An initial state, that will be just empty (no reservations).
```

- A custom `Throwable` to be used in case of an error.
- The logic for the booking insertion. We can take advantage of the
method `modifyF` later on to apply it to the system state.

In addition, we can implement a simple function that will evaluate a
`NonEmptyList` of reservations, inserting them one by one.

```scala mdoc:silent
object TableReservationSystem {

  final case class ReservationId(tableNumber: Int, hour: LocalTime)
  final case class Reservation(id: ReservationId, name: String)
  final case class Reservations(reservations: List[Reservation]) {
    def insert(reservation: Reservation): ThrowableOr[Reservations] =
      if (reservations.exists(r => r.id == reservation.id))
        Left(TableAlreadyReserved(reservation))
      else Right(Reservations(reservations :+ reservation))
  }

>   final case class TableAlreadyReserved(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  final class TableAlreadyReservedException(
```

A personal thing but I think using `case class` for exceptions is an anti-pattern.

      reservation: Reservation
  ) extends RuntimeException(
        s"${reservation.name} cannot be added because table number ${reservation.id.tableNumber} is already reserved for the ${reservation.id.hour}"
      )

  val emptyReservationSystem: Reservations = Reservations(List.empty)

  def insertBooking(
      reservation: Reservation
  ): StateT[ThrowableOr, Reservations, Unit] =
    StateT.modifyF[ThrowableOr, Reservations](_.insert(reservation))

  def processBookings(
      bookings: NonEmptyList[Reservation]
  ): ThrowableOr[Reservations] =
    bookings
      .map(insertBooking)
      .reduceLeft[StateT[ThrowableOr, Reservations, Unit]] {
        case (acc, bookNext) => acc.productL(bookNext)
      }

>       .runS(emptyReservationSystem)

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it's good for an example but this is `traverse` :)

  ),
  TableReservationSystem.Reservation(
    TableReservationSystem
      .ReservationId(tableNumber = 3, hour = LocalTime.parse("13:00:00")),
    name = "Elizabeth Alexandra Mary"
  ),
  TableReservationSystem.Reservation(
    TableReservationSystem
      .ReservationId(tableNumber = 1, hour = LocalTime.parse("16:00:00")),
    name = "Chuck Norris"
  ),
  TableReservationSystem.Reservation(
    TableReservationSystem
      .ReservationId(tableNumber = 2, hour = LocalTime.parse("16:00:00")),
    name = "Kobe Bryant"
  ),
  TableReservationSystem.Reservation(
    TableReservationSystem
      .ReservationId(tableNumber = 2, hour = LocalTime.parse("18:00:00")),
    name = "Steven Seagal"
  )
)

TableReservationSystem.processBookings(bookings)

TableReservationSystem.processBookings(
  bookings :+ TableReservationSystem.Reservation(
    TableReservationSystem
      .ReservationId(tableNumber = 1, hour = LocalTime.parse("16:00:00")),
    name = "Bruce Lee"
  )
)
```

The full source code of this example can be found at this
[gist](https://gist.github.com/benkio/baa4fe1d50751cd602c4175f1bb39f4d)
or [scastie](https://scastie.scala-lang.org/MFHZpU9bRg2e73MLQY1dNQ)

> ## Example: Hangman Game

Reviewer 2: > Unfortunately, the rest of the example can't be shown here due to the

I think it's a bit strange to have 1.5 example :) maybe you can host this one in a personal website/gist, and we can link to from the cats site.

Author: There's a `gist` and a `scastie` at the end of the example as a "continuation". So you are suggesting to remove the "possible" explanation and just leave those links at the end of the documentation hinting something like:
"for a more advanced example check..."

Reviewer 2: Thanks, yes, exactly. Imo it seems odd to start an example we can actually finish :)

      case GameState(_, _, attemptNum) if attemptNum == (maxAttempts - 1) =>
        Left(Loose)
      case GameState(target, guessedChars, attemptNum) =>
        Right(
          GameState(
            target = target,
            guessedChars = guessedChars ++ guess,
            attemptNum = attemptNum + 1
          )
        )
    }
}
```

In the code above you can see some useful functions, such as the one
that returns the encrypted target word.

In the following snippet you can see the above code in action:

```scala mdoc
val gameState1 = GameState("cats")
GameState.showWordHidden(gameState1)
val gameState2 = GameState.attemptGuess(gameState1, "bats")
GameState.showWordHidden(gameState2.getOrElse(???))
```

Unfortunately, the rest of the example can't be shown here due to the
required `cats-effect` dependency. We recommend to check out the rest
of the code at the following
[gist](https://gist.github.com/benkio/46f5aea4f15ec059f02d6bfe9bd25e99)
or [scastie](https://scastie.scala-lang.org/4Ab7xspkRJ2q9UKQ9OHrUQ).

We hope these examples help to clarify how `StateT` can be used in
designing a computation based on state machine steps that may require

> side effects or other capabilities, eg `Option`, `List`, `Fiber` etc.

Reviewer 2: `Fiber` is not like the others :) it's not a monad, and it's not part of Cats anyway. Maybe `Validated` could be a good addition to this list instead.

Author: My bad about `Fiber`, I'll add `Validated` to the list

println(GameState.showWordHidden(gameState2.getOrElse(???)))
```

Let's focus on the state machine game steps:

```scala mdoc:silent
object StateMachine {

  import EffectType._

  def step1(): EffectType[GameState] = for {
    _ <- performEffect[Unit](println("Insert the target word: "))

>     word <- performEffect[String](readLine())

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I think there was a miscommunication :) since we don't have `IO`, there's really no way we can use `readLine()` or `printLine()` or any side-effects at all in this example unfortunately.

One way forward is to use effects that we can model with datatypes available in cats. For example, `Either` can be used to raise errors and short circuit, or `Writer` can be used for logging (this would be the closest to what you currently have).

Author: Ah ok, 
Now everything is clearer. 
Then, I'll proceed in this way:
- Refactor the code for the hangman example using `IO`, but not embedding the code into the docs. Just put an external link to the gist. Otherwise, I can just add the code, but ask `mdoc` to not compile/run it, even if it might expose it to go out of sync.
- Add another example with `Either` and some validation process that require a State as well.

Let me know your thoughts about this plan, if you like it, then I'll proceed 😉
Thanks for the feedback 🙏

Reviewer 2: 👍 to the table reservation example, I like it! :)

I think we can keep your current example (refactored to use `IO`) as a second, "advanced" example like you suggest. Instead of a gist I wonder if we could put it in a scastie.
